this case in a lot of ways has been a
reminder to me of how much I really do
understand Thai culture but of how much
I've wanted to forget what i know about
thai culture northern Thailand Laos I do
understand the way people think feel do
business there I understand some of the
language issues that lurk behind
cultural misunderstandings because years
of my life were taken up with you know
research and work in that part of the
world but in a lot of ways it's stuff I
don't want to think about it's it's an
understanding that i thought was part of
my past and you know just today I was
reflecting on why I feel so sad for
during writer for the very real
possibility that the story ends with him
in prison and you know I have to reflect
on all this research I did back in the
day for years and years of my life you
know I really thought that prison
activism was going to be a significant
part of my my career or Mike
humanitarian work because you know one
time Buddhism was a you know prime
leading part of my identity I was first
and foremost a scholar tera vaada
Buddhism and then any interested in
ecology or vegetarianism or veganism was
was secondary that this is back in the
day so I thought for a long time that I
would be involved with programs to
improve education inside prisons just in
being engaged with prison conditions and
I was interested in that and did
research into that was you know trying
to get the first stages of a
humanitarian involvement going when I
was in Laos when I was in Thailand when
I was in Cambodia but also when I was in
England believe it or not I was talking
to people vote about prison charity for
the negativism etc and of course when I
was in Canada when I was in Saskatchewan
involved with the the Korean a jib way
there I was really interested short-term
and long-term about charity work
education work etc a link to the prison
populations so I mean none of that it's
not a repressed memory it's just
something I haven't thought about and I
didn't want to think about because in
many ways it's a saddening reminder of
my own lost potential
and if things I want to do with my life
that I now know I'm never going to be
able to do but really as soon as I
stopped being a Buddhist in any sense as
soon as I broke with the religion I
guess you know my hopes for prison
related charity work ended with that
also but to give just I mean I remember
one prison I actually visited in Laos
and I talked to the warden I didn't say
much there was someone else they spoke
to language fluently but you know I
didn't go inside that prison but I still
saw a fair bit of that prison that was a
prison with concrete walls that was a
pretty high level prison by Lao
standards and I saw other prisons that
had bamboo walls you know whether he
could see through walls he saw inside
the prison without having to go inside
the prison and nobody was trying to
escape I mean those prisoners they could
have they could have punched their way
through the wall but they knew what the
consequences would be so nobody was
trying to escape from from those bring a
couple prisons or so and when I was in
Cambodia saw some prisons that were
truly truly third world and you know
this is the other thing with
humanitarian work you spend more time
wanting to do it than actually doing it
I very intentionally met and spoke with
him had meetings with people who had
done that type of research or done that
type of activism or done that type of
charity work and so I learned things
from from talking to them and you know
when he talked to people face-to-face
you notice there are some things that
are comfortable telling you and there's
some things they're uncomfortable
telling you and there's some things
they've seen inside the prison's that
they're still traumatized by you really
you know all those nuances come across
so I mean just today I was reflecting on
this like on some level I would feel
happy if Durham writer didn't have to go
to prison even though I do think that
pushing forward with this case is the
right thing to do and it's what I have
to do morally it's obligatory but it's
it's a sad situation for me personally
in many ways including the reflecting I
have to do on the Thai establishment how
the Thai legal system actually works
and what the attitudes are within the
Thai establishment I you know Thailand a
lot of their institutions have borrowed
the names of British institutions and
they seem to follow the format
oppression institutions so they have a
prosecution service that resembles in
England you know what's called the
Queen's prosecution service of the court
the Crown Prosecution Service think
these days people say crown prosecution
service rather than kings or Queens but
it's used it's used all those names
historically in some ways outwardly even
if you look at footage from or
photographs from inside a tie courtroom
it looks a lot like specifically the
British model of how a legal system
works but then when you actually get
involved in these ways you're reminded
of the deep and profound ways in which
Thailand is culturally alien from any
European country and you know it's not
just procedural a lot of it really is
cultural but it's important for us I
mean so I have a lot to say in this
video apart from the kind of bare facts
of providing an update on the case it's
a very onion term to use we have this
idiom in English you know boiling frog a
boiling frog scenario all of us even I
myself all of us lose sight of just how
violent and vile and dangerous and
hurtful and offensive during writers
conduct as we all get used to it even me
we hear it again and again there people
have been seeing this for years and they
start to treat it as if it's business as
usual and then you know I talked to my
lawyer and the lawyer talked to the
judge and you get the reaction from the
thai establishment and you're reminded
you know from an outsider's perspective
from an objective for anyone's objective
perspective but especially from a
conservative member of the thai
establishment from someone whose career
has been in the law whether they're a
judge or a lawyer or a bureaucrat you
know someone who is really a
conservative member of the establishment
they watched
just one video from durianrider like
just the video he put up on September
first is very recent I'm recording this
today what is this in September ninth
yeah today September 9th Bieber video
recently tember first that video alone
can result in you doing a hard time
entitlement out one video and you know
he restates many you know accusations
many slanderous and defamatory and
frankly threatening and harassing things
he said against me in the past and there
really is a sense both during writers
critics and his supporters have just
become desensitized to this in a boiling
frog scenario and it was funny but me
hearing my lawyers voice on the phone
today and again I have years of really
deep experience with Thai culture not
from a tourist perspective I've worked
inside the Thai government I have worked
inside Buddhist monasteries if I think
they're different you know even your
experience inside hospitals if you talk
to people who are more like medical
employees I mean they're conservative in
different ways they're members of the
establishment in different ways from a
Buddhist monk related story from
university professors have all this
experience inside universities and
universities can be extremely
conservative places in Thailand but you
know someone like that whether it's the
judge or the other people in that
courtroom in that bureaucratic context
the way they feel about the how shocked
they are and how they regard during
writer they perceive him are they okay I
guess we'll give the you know that way
this is my interpretation they can't say
allegedly but you know I think they
perceive him as insane and dangerous and
out of control and they're right you
know um and there's a sense in which
everyone loses sight of that whether the
people who are laughing at him or the
people who are laughing with him people
are making excuses for him where people
who got fed up with the excuse a long
time ago people who regard him as lying
all the time
or people who actually believe what he
says the people who regard what he says
is a mixed treatment vision there really
has been a boiling frog scenario and it
was just funny for me today cuz hearing
my lawyers voice on the phone and you
he'd already he's talked to judges more
than once already in this procedure of
these proceedings you know the depth of
that sense of just shocked I can't say
outraged but I mean the sense of you
know this person is a danger to the
public and the right he's proven that
I'm not the only case I'm not the only
instance this is somebody who's doing
dangerous and harmful things again and
again and you know we forget that and
this sense in which I forgot that was up
until today so again in parallel to the
British crown prosecution service I was
afraid because it so every time a case
is presented Crown Prosecution Service
and in England in the British system
which in some ways on the surface the
Thai system resembles the British system
if they're presented with the case they
have to make a decision they make a
series of decisions but one of the most
important decisions is whether or not
bringing the case to trial serves the
public interest and this is a very
British thing because it's completely
non-democratic completely non
transparent no public accountability but
in many cases especially when something
very bizarre and conflicted happens
sometimes their cases of murder that are
in the in the newspapers but it's a
murderer where someone was attempting to
prevent another murder there was some
really complex set of circumstances and
the the crown just decides not to bring
the case to trial they just say no it's
not in the public interest to bring a
trial and I just mentioned I think the
public will they mostly notice this the
press like the newspapers they noticed
this happen when it's some very strange
set of circumstances because people are
interested LT they'd like to see it go
to trial but the crown just decides no
it doesn't serve the poconos so before
its arch Miller today I was actually
concerned that the crown or sorry the
prosecution service in Thailand I don't
know
the user but the prosecution would
decide that this case was not worth
pressing and again I mean there's so
many ways in which so I keep using this
idea of the boiling frog but you know in
some ways Thai society is very
liberating and very permissive in some
ways it is very indulgent towards its
tourists towards for foreigners who go
there and get drunk and misbehave
they're famous for that they tolerate a
lot of drunkenness behavior on the part
of foreign tourists and you know even I
with my years of deep experience that I
establishment you forget that
tremendously conservative tera vaada
Buddhist Orthodox establishment that's
there all the time and that is ruling
the country and that takes very
seriously their obligation to do justice
it's no joke I mean that's funny because
again this brings back they're not
repressed memories but it's just
memories of a whole career I had as a
scholar in that part of the world that
makes me sad to think about so I I don't
think about it very often but I mean you
know like in Thailand give you a sense
of what that subculture is like the same
way in the United States there's a
George there's a family surrounding
George Bush you know the the George Bush
clan family what have you there are
these conservative families that are you
know really the strength of the
government and I mean they'll be members
of a Buddhist temple that only performs
funeral ceremonies for people who've
done Navy service and they will put
their sons into the Navy for a few years
and the sons will go to naval academy or
in other cases it will be the the army
you know the army on land or the Air
Force or the police service and their
sons will do a couple years in the Navy
and maybe get some education you know
the military academy our naval academy
and their sons will do some period of
time as a Buddhist monk most likely
serving in a temple that's linked to
that same temple and they will go into
some kind of bureaucratic or legal
career you know there is a you know we
use this word there is the establishment
in Thailand it's very politically
complex and nuanced of course there are
different allegiances and alliance
and I mean even the fact you can be in a
town where there really is like oh yeah
that's that's the Buddhist monastery
that's linked to the Navy and that's the
Buddhist monastery it's linked to the
police or the the army or maybe both
were you know those types of unspoken
distinctions and most time those
different institutions don't get along
the army don't get along with the police
and the police don't get along with the
Army and the Navy and the land army or
you know supporting different factions
politically blah blah blah all this
stuff is going on below the surface but
apart from the politics of the day
there's also the politics of the
millennium politics stretching back
centuries centuries of these people who
really take their moral duty there there
there are ethical obligations very
seriously and come out of that that
hardcore tera vaada Buddhist background
that I understand so well I'm one of the
few white men who can really say I have
some appreciation for that some
appreciation for what it means if you
know obviously there's the actual ritual
elements of being a Buddhist monk and
you know even even though of course the
religion is corrupt but you know on that
sentimental level of you know your
grandfather dies and you become a
Buddhist monk for two weeks during the
grieving period uh you know you have a
respected elder who dies and once a
month you go to visit the wall there
remains are put in you know as a
concrete wall that human remains and you
go to show your respect to this disease
really you know there are there are so
many elements to that conservative
culture and it's there all the time and
tourists don't see it because they don't
want to see it you know but the same I
could say to some extent is true of like
Florida I mean do you really feel how
conservative Florida is as a state and
who is the Florida establishment who
runs the police who runs the courts who
are the lawyers and the politicians who
is the establishment in Florida who are
those families the equivalent to the
George Bush family in Florida though
actually some of George Bush's family
members are living in Florida and they
are part of the Florida stuff now now
that i think about it Florida includes
George Bush's family but it away um
you know if you go to Disneyland or you
go to Miami and you go to nightclubs in
Miami you don't see that conservative
establishment in Florida but it's there
I just I mean today again I stopped
thinking about it because I it's for me
personally it's sad reminds me of my
years being involved with charity work
there and trying to be more involved
being involved with Buddhist scholarship
and trying to be more involved all those
dreams that have died for me are linked
to that understanding out of that
culture in that context you know there's
another sense even the work I did
professionally we're getting
professionally and you know day-to-day
reality of living in Bangkok I have
lived in Bangkok in the past I have
lived in Chiang Mai in the past I have
lived in Laos blah blah blah you guys
know I have experienced in the area but
like you know I was getting mad at my
lawyer a few days ago because you know
he would send me an email saying oh yeah
okay i'll send you another email about
that tomorrow you know in thailand as a
language as a culture tomorrow doesn't
really mean tomorrow so like four days
go by and i'm sending the guy furious
email saying look you know you said you
would have this done by tomorrow and you
know i mean that's that's thailand you
know like really thats thailand like
really with thailand tomorrow doesn't
mean tomorrow um it was a saying in the
language they're very close languages
but would I gel me whele of course now
my pronunciation is getting sloppier and
sloppy or so many years ago by so that
was important language my life but you
know um you know like I would say to
people ok do it when you have time would
I Jamie whele when you have enough time
to do it so you go to a tailor you go to
some other shop to order something to be
done you're gonna come back and pick it
up it's ok you know do it when you have
time and you'd say you know okay I'll
come back on Saturday or something and
come back and they they wouldn't done
anything they wouldn't even started
doing it or something you know I learned
because it was not in my nature to peel
like this but you know people who live
there their whole lives the friends of
mine who were born and raised there they
really had to explain oh no no when he
wants something done you never say
do it when you have time or i can come
back saturday you say why isn't it
finished already and you'd be a jerk
about it every time and it'll still be
late and they'll still tell you tomorrow
and tomorrow doesn't really mean
tomorrow tomorrow means two weeks from
now so I mean on a deep level thailand
and laos in some ways they're different
cultures but in some ways they're
profoundly similar cultures the link
between them is ancient and ongoing
these these two cultures so you know i'm
reminded of those elements in dealing
with a lawyer i'm reminded of what the
attitude and perspective of the thai
establishment is and i'm most of all
I've just been given a wake-up call with
the extent to which all of us we've just
gotten used to such a high level of
those two things violence and defamation
and they're both totally unacceptable
within veganism now if we were talking
about a football you know like the sport
of football maybe some level of violence
and defamation is acceptable and then
above that it's not acceptable if we
were talking about the sport of
wrestling or boxing you know there are
some ass elements in our culture where
people insult each other and they defame
each other and there's some violence you
know I don't know that's a different
question but within veganism as a
political movement as an ecological
movement as an animal rights movement
doong doong doong zero this is totally
unacceptable and the reaction of gotten
just now you know from the lawyer and
indirectly from that whole courtroom
just you know what I feel coming back
from the procedures we've already had it
really reminds me of that and we can't
we really can't lose sight of that
short-term or long-term this is all
about drawing that line where you say
this is acceptable this is unacceptable
but emotionally for the reasons I talk
about the beginning of this model on
emotionally because I've seen those
prisons because i had that interest in
those prisons there still is a sense on
a deep level in which I feel like I
don't you know I feel like I'd be happy
for the guy if he doesn't go to prison
but it's it's is this is so serious it's
not a joking matter and after the the
last court hearing you know my judge
confirmed for me that from the from the
prosecution's perspective
um this is serious enough that even if
he leaves Thailand they are going to
refer the arrest warrant they're going
to to to the authorities in Australia so
I was also concerned about that earlier
i do not know that the the minimum set
or i think that's only for cases where
the sentence is over a certain length of
time i do not know if that's two years
or what but where the charges are
serious enough and the sentence is long
enough that even if the person flees the
country you know the paperwork will be
handed on to the government of Australia
so that also I was uncertain about
earlier would the with the crown
prosecution service or sir whatever they
call it there the National bus station
would they take these charges seriously
enough to pursue them even if he flees
to Australia before this process is done
on paper and the answer is yes so had
that confirmed for me today or guests
confirmed again because I was I was I
had my doubts about that because I
forgot I forgot about I didn't forget I
wasn't thinking about who those people
are I wasn't thinking about their
cultural perspective the type of person
who becomes a career bureaucrat a lawyer
a judge a member of the establishment
out that conservative core that sees it
as their duty to actually serve the
public interest to actually keep the
peace and to actually punish people who
are insane or dangerous or who do harm
to others on the kingdom soil and you
take that duty seriously I know who
those people are I know them and you can
see them in Buddhist temples you can see
them on University campuses and you can
meet them you know whatever I met them
when I was working for the government
myself in Thailand I met those people
and I saw you know there are many sad
elements of the lives those people lead
as tiling goes through the vicissitudes
of 11 revolution after another one coup
date after another one experimental
attempted democracy after another there
are many sad elements to that and I've
seen so many governments rise and fall
in Thailand I can't keep count but yeah
I I lost sight of that myself so sorry
for me that's
something something moving in something
real and it's nice for me to hear that
you know those are the people who are in
my corner and they're not in my corner
because they know me or like me they're
in my corner because again just even one
video from durianrider they look at just
one video like that and they take very
seriously that this is somebody the law
needs to handle you know whoo so look
guys it is not in my interest to make
public any of the other details of this
court case those of you have been
following them patron for a long time
know that it is not in my interest to
educate durianrider or anyone else about
exactly what the charges are or exactly
what happened what happens where you
know all of us are learning that we do
not understand the Thai legal system as
well as we think we do and it has been
hilarious to me to see everyone
pretending they're experts on the law in
general and then pertaining the experts
in the law with in Thailand specifically
it's just a joke and mostly people have
never well girls are even been to
Thailand but they never thought about
they never given serious consideration
to what the situation is what's going on
um but for me both in terms of the the
formal legal process and in terms the
informal cultural expectations behind
that process and how it works I'm I'm
you know I'm learning so much so like
the the September sixth court aid from
my perspective I thought okay so that
means my lawyer has all the paperwork
done and then he goes to the hearing
that's the end of the poor like that's
the the conclusive point at which all
the papers are smooth the judge and no
again this is partly cultural not just
you know the explicit legal organization
things he goes to that court date and
you know he talks to the judge and the
judge gives him a checklist of things to
do and they have a conversation about
how the evidence needs to be prepared
seems like a very helpful and collegial
process but that's not what I was
expecting I thought that was the kind of
end point where my lawyer would present
the papers to the judge and either the
papers would be good enough to proceed
or they would not be would get a yes or
no answer but no it's obviously much
more of a ongoing nuanced process where
the judge was basically advising my
lawyer as to what requirements were what
what needed to be done but will be
helpful the case etc etc and um so none
of us understand the legal process as
well as we think we do I think even my
lawyer doesn't understand shalinka
process as well if he thinks he does and
you know my lawyer has told me that it
will be absolutely necessary for me to
go to court in person as a witness and
as a victim and to testify and to swear
and I did not know that until a couple
days ago and today he confirmed that he
said no you have to this is obligatory
for you and I know some of you guys
think I'm wealthy but I'm really not the
only way I can afford to do that is from
the money given on patreon because the
money donated for the legal cause the
money donated through generosity calm
the money donated through generosity it
has all been spent 100 percent of that
went to cover the lawyers fees and in
fact I'm on the hook to pay more monies
the lawyer and future I hope the the
Supplemental fees do not add up to too
much but it's this could indeed end up
costing me more or considerably more
than what I raised and you know some of
you guys know that it's stupid in the
past people were always complaining oh I
didn't ask for enough money it's
impossible for the cost so little again
I did that moral principle i just wanted
to raise exactly the amount of money
that i needed to pay the lawyer period
you know another you know people were
but people used to say that the case
must be fake because it was too cheap
and you know now people say the opposite
you know now people say it's so much
money that i must have stolen it because
it's more than it's just stupid no
matter what you do with these people and
people say like why don't i post more
documents online or something doesn't
matter if i post documents people say
the documents are fake like you've got
understand what the game is here we this
is about someone who has been accused of
a serious crime and again we
we do lose sight of that we do forget
that um and he is willing to lie in his
own defense understandable and he is
willing to lie to continue defaming and
harassing me and threatening me um so we
know when you know that and when you
know this guy's track record of lying
about everything clearly just lying
about things I can't believe anyone lies
but people are not lying about whether
or not I ever went to university so you
know if I'd never gone to university I'd
be proud of it I'd talk about that up
but like any way stupid I mean I know
when people lie saying I used to work
for the CIA or whatever would you know
yeah right CIA program to do original
research on Buddhist philosophy right I
wish sign me up for that program you
know so that's it I mean you know that's
the update and it is mostly a
sentimental update rather than a factual
update but as you guys know I do like to
record videos that I might want to watch
myself five years to nine ten years from
now and I you know so trying to share
the way I feel and the thoughts you know
that I'm swimming in at this peculiar
juncture in the case that's at least
something valuable to me right now and
maybe it's valuable and worthwhile to
some of you maybe not